README.md, before:

# A homegrown course management system

This repository houses the source code that runs the [course management system](https://kurse.ifsr.de) operated by the [student representatives](https://www.ifsr.de) of the computer science department at [TU Dresden](https://tu-dresden.de). It can be used to manage programming courses or pretty much every other event that has a limited number of attendees and should therefore offer a registration.

## Technical tidbits

The course system is written in [Django](https://djangoproject.com/) and uses the [Litera](https://bootswatch.com/litera/) Bootstrap theme.

For more details on the design decisions taken and the general structure of the application, please refer to the [**design overview**](./OVERVIEW.md).

## Setting up a development environment

1. In order to use this project, you need `python3` and `poetry` on your system. Install them via your distribution's package manager.
2. Copy the example configuration and customize it as you see fit:
```
cp course-management/course/settings.py.example course-management/course/settings.py
```
3. Install any Python dependencies via `poetry install`. PostgreSQL support is gated behind a poetry extra. If you need it, run `poetry install -E pgsql`.
4. Run `poetry run course-management/manage.py migrate` to apply the database migrations.
5. Run `poetry run course-management/manage.py loaddata courses` to load a sample data set.
6. Fire up the development server with `poetry run course-management/manage.py runserver`.
7. You now can login with the super user **foo** and password **bar**

Another test user is available by logging in as `test: test`.

Opening `http://[project url]/admin` in your browser gives you access to the standard admin interface of Django which you can use to make manual changes to the database.

### Using nix

This project's flake provides a devShell that sets up everything for you. Activate it by executing `nix develop` or using direnv, and the manage.py commands will work as above.

## Changing the database model

When changing the database model make sure that the fixture located in `course/fixtures/courses.yaml` still works.
If not, export a new version of the fixture using the command
```
python manage.py dumpdata --format yaml --exclude contenttypes --output course/fixtures/courses.yaml
```
It should always include the two aforementioned test users and a set of example courses.

## Deployment

To deploy the application in an productive environment, using a SQLite database is discouraged.
The amount of concurrent users during registration frequently overwhelms the simplistic architecture and therefore, a MySQL/Postgres database should be preferred.
Be sure to change the `settings.py` configuration accordingly.

Otherwise, just follow steps 1-4 from the checklist above, then follow the standard [instructions for deploying a Django application](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/howto/deployment/) and check the [deployment checklist](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/howto/deployment/checklist/).

Run the `poetry run course-management/manage.py createsuperuser` command to create a root user for the application to be able to assign administrative privileges to new users.
Admin rights may in general only be granted from the `http://[site url]/admin` page by selecting the appropriate user there and giving them staff/superuser rights.

### NixOS module

The NixOS module can be used in a flake like this:
```nix
{
  inputs.course-management.url = "github:fsr/course-management";

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, course-management }: {
    nixosConfigurations.yourhostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      system = "x86_64-linux";
      modules = [
        ./configuration.nix
        course-management.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.course-management = {
            enable = true;
            hostName = "courses.example.com";
            settings.adminPassFile = "/run/secrets/course-management-adminPass";
            # settings.database = { ... };
            # ...
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```
A superuser named `admin` will be created with the password stored in `adminPassFile`.
Nginx will be set up to serve the application on `hostName`, unless none is configured.
Note however that TLS will *not* be enabled by default and should be configured separately.
As explained above, it is recommended to configure a database suited for use in a productive environment. PostgreSQL is supported without further configuration.

## License

This software is licensed with the BSD3 license. See the `LICENSE` file for more information.

Commit message:

Install wrapped manage.py to system, make automatic superuser optional

README.md, after:

# A homegrown course management system

This repository houses the source code that runs the [course management system](https://kurse.ifsr.de) operated by the [student representatives](https://www.ifsr.de) of the computer science department at [TU Dresden](https://tu-dresden.de). It can be used to manage programming courses or pretty much every other event that has a limited number of attendees and should therefore offer a registration.

## Technical tidbits

The course system is written in [Django](https://djangoproject.com/) and uses the [Litera](https://bootswatch.com/litera/) Bootstrap theme.

For more details on the design decisions taken and the general structure of the application, please refer to the [**design overview**](./OVERVIEW.md).

## Setting up a development environment

1. In order to use this project, you need `python3` and `poetry` on your system. Install them via your distribution's package manager.
2. Copy the example configuration and customize it as you see fit:
```
cp course-management/course/settings.py.example course-management/course/settings.py
```
3. Install any Python dependencies via `poetry install`. PostgreSQL support is gated behind a poetry extra. If you need it, run `poetry install -E pgsql`.
4. Run `poetry run course-management/manage.py migrate` to apply the database migrations.
5. Run `poetry run course-management/manage.py loaddata courses` to load a sample data set.
6. Fire up the development server with `poetry run course-management/manage.py runserver`.
7. You now can login with the super user **foo** and password **bar**

Another test user is available by logging in as `test: test`.

Opening `http://[project url]/admin` in your browser gives you access to the standard admin interface of Django which you can use to make manual changes to the database.

### Using nix

This project's flake provides a devShell that sets up everything for you. Activate it by executing `nix develop` or using direnv, and the manage.py commands will work as above.

## Changing the database model

When changing the database model make sure that the fixture located in `course/fixtures/courses.yaml` still works.
If not, export a new version of the fixture using the command
```
python manage.py dumpdata --format yaml --exclude contenttypes --output course/fixtures/courses.yaml
```
It should always include the two aforementioned test users and a set of example courses.

## Deployment

To deploy the application in an productive environment, using a SQLite database is discouraged.
The amount of concurrent users during registration frequently overwhelms the simplistic architecture and therefore, a MySQL/Postgres database should be preferred.
Be sure to change the `settings.py` configuration accordingly.

Otherwise, just follow steps 1-4 from the checklist above, then follow the standard [instructions for deploying a Django application](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/howto/deployment/) and check the [deployment checklist](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/3.2/howto/deployment/checklist/).

Run the `poetry run course-management/manage.py createsuperuser` command to create a root user for the application to be able to assign administrative privileges to new users.
Admin rights may in general only be granted from the `http://[site url]/admin` page by selecting the appropriate user there and giving them staff/superuser rights.

### NixOS module

The NixOS module can be used in a flake like this:
```nix
{
  inputs.course-management.url = "github:fsr/course-management";

  outputs = { self, nixpkgs, course-management }: {
    nixosConfigurations.yourhostname = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
      system = "x86_64-linux";
      modules = [
        ./configuration.nix
        course-management.nixosModules.default
        {
          services.course-management = {
            enable = true;
            hostName = "courses.example.com";
            settings.adminPassFile = "/run/secrets/course-management-adminPass";
            # settings.database = { ... };
            # ...
          };
        }
      ];
    };
  };
}
```
Nginx will be set up to serve the application on `hostName`, unless none is configured.
Note however that TLS will *not* be enabled by default and should be configured separately.
As explained above, it is recommended to configure a database suited for use in a productive environment. PostgreSQL is supported without further configuration.

If the option is set, a superuser named `admin` with the password stored in `adminPassFile` will be created automatically.
Alternatively, you can create a superuser using the wrapped `manage.py` script (as explained above), which is installed to the system environment as `cm-manage`.

## License

This software is licensed with the BSD3 license. See the `LICENSE` file for more information.
